---
title: "Concrete Autoencoders for Differentiable Feature Selection and Reconstruction"
date: 2026-03-02T23:40:48-08:00
authors: ["Abubakar Abid", "Muhammad Fatih Balin", "James Zou"]
year: 2019
tags: ["autoencoder", "concrete distribution", "gumbel", "gumbel softmax", "feature selection", "sparse"]
categories: ["supervised", "unsupervised", "probabilistic"]
paper_url: "https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.09346"
doi: ""
paper_src: "arXiv"
bibkey: "abid2019"
math: true
draft: false
---

## Summary
Utilizes Concrete (Gumbel Softmax) RVs to select features via gradient descent, relying on the reparameterization trick. The Concrete layer has $k$ concrete RVs where $k$ is the number of desired features and each is $d$-dimensional (so selects $k$ features from $d$). High temperature parameters of the Concrete RVs make each a continuous relaxation of a multinomial distribution. Temperatures approaching $0$ make them look like categorical one-hot vectors. Trained unsupervised using reconstruction error (training associated decoder) but also supervised replacing with classifier and CE loss.

Can find spatially close, related features in MNIST, and important genes that can infer the values of other genes in GEO dataset. Performs better than compared baselines (PCA), principal feature analysis (PFA), Laplacian score, etc.

## Key Contributions
Gradient-based method for feature selection that can work with reconstruction as well as classification.

## Limitations and Future Work
Selected $k$ might contain duplicates. 

## Key Equations
Temperature over $B$ epochs with initial temp $T_0$: $T = T_0 (\frac{T_B}{T_0})^{\frac{b}{B}}$

$i$-th node of Concrete layer with parameter (prob) $\alpha^{(i)}$: $m^{(i)} \sim Concrete(\alpha^{(i)}, T)$

feature selection: $u^{(i)} = X \cdot m^{(i)}$

$j$-th element of Concrete RV with Gumbel(0,1) $g_j$: $m_j = \frac{\exp((\log (\alpha_j) + g_j)/T)}{\sum_{k=1}^{d} \exp((\log (\alpha_k) + g_k)/T)}$

## Other Notes
