---
title: "AIC and BIC: Comparisons of Assumptions and Performance"
date: 2026-03-13T16:31:00-07:00
authors: ["Jouni Kuha"]
year: 2004
tags: ["overview", "statistics", "information theory", "aic", "bic"]
categories: ["statistics"]
paper_url: ""
doi: "10.1177/0049124103262"
paper_src: "Sage Journals"
bibkey: "kuha2004"
math: true
draft: false
---

## Summary
Gives an overview of (two-model) AIC and BIC as well as their derivations. Although they end up with similar expressions (likelihood difference with parameter-count penalty), they have different origins. BIC comes from a Laplace approximation of likelihood ratios of two different models and assumes the true data-generation model is amongst the candidate models. Given its Bayesian approach, it is sensitive to the (implicit) prior distribution of parameters (which is based on a $n_0$-sized sample). BIC has **consistency**, where it selects the true model from candidate models as sample size of data increases. AIC does not require the true model be amongst the candidates but instead takes a frequentist approach by comparing the KL diverence between the model likelihood and the true generating function. The eventual AIC compares the models' generalization of MLE-derived parameters of models over a new dataset. Here, $n_0$ appears again but refers to the sample size used to find the MLE-derived parameters. AIC tends to perform best in large sample sizes when the true model is not present (asymptotic efficiency). Comparisons between the two are made on normal linear models as well as log-linear models.

## Key Contributions
Theoretical overview and intuitions about AIC and BIC as well as experiments on normal linear models as well as log-linear models.

Comparisons are made between small and large $n_0$ (applies to both but initially presented for BIC) where it is shown that 
likelihood with larger models spread probabilities over higher-dim parameter space (and thus less over data-supported areas). Higher-dimension parameter space means choice in parameters but also "more chances of getting that choice wrong".

## Limitations and Future Work

## Key Equations
### AIC
Marginal likelihood of data $D$ for model $M_k$ parameterized by $\theta_k$:

$P(D|M_k) = \int p(D|\theta_k, M_k) p(\theta_k | M_k) d\theta_k$

Model comparison:

$\frac{p(M_2|D)}{p(M_1|D)} = \frac{p(D|M_2)}{p(D|M_1)} \frac{P(M_2)}{P(M_1)}$

Laplace approximation ($\tilde{theta_k}$: mode of posterior $p(\theta_k | D, M_k)$, $\Psi_k = -[\partial^2 l(\tilde{\theta_k})/\partial \theta_k \partial \theta^{\prime}_k + \partial^2 \lambda(\tilde{\theta_k})/\partial \theta_k \partial \theta^{\prime}_k]^{-1}$, error approx $O(n^{-1})$):

$T_B \approx 2[l(\tilde{\theta_2}) - l(\tilde{\theta_1})] + 2[\lambda(\tilde{\theta_2}) - l(\lambda{\theta_1})] + \log|\Psi_2| - \log |\Psi_1| + (p_2 - p_1)\log(2 \pi)$

$T_B \approx BIC_e = 2[l(\tilde{\theta_2}) - l(\tilde{\theta_1})] - \log(1 + \frac{n}{n_0})(p_2 - p_1)$


$BIC = 2[l(\tilde{\theta_2}) - l(\tilde{\theta_1})] - \log(n)(p_2 - p_1)$

### AIC

KL-divergence:

$I[f, p(\theta_k)] = \int f(y) \log[\frac{f(y)}{p(y | \theta_k, M_k)}] dy = C - \mathbb{E}_y \log p(y | \theta_k ; M_k)$

Extension generalizing over $y$ from MLE-derived $\hat{\theta_k^x}$ over data $x$:

$T_A = 2 \mathbb{E}_x {I[f, p_1(\hat{theta_1^x})] - I[f, p_1(\hat{theta_2^x})] = 2 \mathbb{E}_x \mathbb{E}_y [ \log p(y | \hat{theta_2^x}, M_2) - \log p(y | \hat{theta_1^x}, M_1)]$

$T_A \approx AIC_e = 2[l(\hat{\theta_2}) - l(\hat{theta_1})] - (1 + \frac{n}{n_0})(p_2 - p_1)$

$AIC = 2[l(\hat{\theta_2}) - l(\hat{theta_1})] - 2(p_2 - p_1)$

## Other Notes
